Overview of Plugins (#287)
PaperMC/docs: docs/paper/dev/api/how-do-plugins-work.md

Reviewer: the API references, i.e. events and `Thread#sleep`, could be linked to their respective javadocs

---
slug: /dev/how-do-plugins-work
description: How plugins work in Paper.
---

# How Plugins Work

## Introduction

> Plugins are a way to extend the functionality of a Minecraft server. They are written in Java and can be loaded and 

Reviewer: they can be written in other languages that run on the JVM as well, such as Kotlin, Groovy or Scala

`.jar` file or from a folder. 

## Plugin Lifecycle

Plugins are loaded and unloaded at runtime. When a plugin is loaded, it is initialized and enabled. When a plugin is 
unloaded, it is disabled and finalized.

### Initialization

When a plugin is loaded, it is initialized. This means that the plugin is loaded into memory and its `onLoad` 
method is called. This method is used to initialize the plugin and set up any resources that it needs.

### Enabling

When a plugin is enabled, its `onEnable` method is called. This method is used to set up any resources that the plugin 
needs to run. This method is called when the plugin is initialized but before the server has started ticking, so it is 
safe to register event listeners and other resources that the plugin needs to run, however often not safe to interact 
with a lot of APIs.

### Disabling

When a plugin is disabled, its `onDisable` method is called. This method is used to clean up any resources that the 
plugin has allocated. This method is called before all plugins are unloaded, and is meant for any cleanup that needs to

> be done before the plugin is unloaded.

Reviewer: worthwhile to mention some examples as with `onEnable`, such as closing database connections or saving data

## Event Listeners

Events are a way for plugins to listen to things that happen in the server. Events are fired when something happens,
and plugins can listen to these events and run code when they are fired. For example, the `PlayerJoinEvent` is fired 
when a player joins the server. Plugins can listen to this event and run code when it is fired. This is a more 
performant way to run code when something happens, as opposed to constantly checking if something has happened.

Some events are cancellable. This means that when the event is fired, it can be cancelled. For example, the

> `PlayerMoveEvent` is cancellable. This means that when the event is fired, it can be cancelled. This means that the

Reviewer: duplicate sentence (first occurrence is a line above)
```suggestion
`PlayerMoveEvent` is cancellable. Cancelling it would mean that the
```

player will not move. This is useful for things like anti-cheat, where you want to cancel the event if the player is
moving too fast.

> It is important to think about how hot an event is when writing event listeners. A hot event is an event that is fired

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is important to think about how "hot" an event is when writing event listeners. A "hot" event is an event that is fired
```

very often. For example, the `PlayerMoveEvent` is fired every time a player moves. This means that if you have a lot of
expensive code in your event listener, it will be run every time a player moves. This can cause a lot of lag. It is
important to keep event listeners as lightweight as possible.

## Commands

Commands are a way for players to run code on the server. Commands are registered by plugins and can be run by players.

> For example,[update.md](..%2F..%2Fadmin%2Fhow-to%2Fupdate.md) the `/help` command is registered by the server and can be run by players. Commands can be run by players

Reviewer: out of place link

by typing them in the chat or by running them from a command block. Commands can also be run by other plugins.

Commands can have arguments. For example, the `/give` command takes an argument for the player to give the item to and

> an argument for the item to give. Commands can also have flags. For example, the `/give` command has a flag for the

Reviewer: never heard about "flags", isn't the item amount also an argument?

amount of items to give. Commands can also have subcommands. For example, the `/help` command has subcommands for
different pages of the help menu.

### Permissions

> Permissions are a way to control who can run commands and who can listen to events. Permissions are registered by

Reviewer: they can be used for much much more than that

plugins and can be checked by other plugins. Permissions can be granted to players and groups. Permissions can also be
granted to other permissions. For example, the `paper.command.help` permission is granted to the `paper.command`
permission. This means that if a player has the `paper.command` permission, they will also have the `paper.command.help`
permission.

## Configuration

Plugins can have configuration files. These files are used to store data that the plugin needs to run. For example, a
plugin that adds a new block to the game might have a configuration file that stores the block's ID. Configuration files
are stored in the `plugins` folder in the server directory. Configuration files are written in YAML. See 
[here](/paper

> /dev/plugin-configurations) for more information.+

Reviewer: is the plus sign at the end intentional?

---
slug: /dev/how-do-plugins-work
description: How plugins work in Paper.
---

# How Plugins Work

## Introduction

Plugins are a way to extend the functionality of a Minecraft server. They are written in JVM-based languages such as 
Java, Kotlin, Groovy or Scala. Plugins are loaded from the `plugins` folder in the server directory. Plugins will be 

> loaded from a `.jar` file. 

Reviewer 2: maybe add something about extending javaplugin and a big note about not using the ctor

method is called. This method is used to initialize the plugin and set up any resources that it needs. Most of the
Bukkit API is not available at this point, so it is not safe to interact with it.

### Enabling

When a plugin is enabled, its `onEnable` method is called. This method is used to set up any resources that the plugin 
needs to run. This method is called when the plugin is initialized but before the server has started ticking, so it is 
safe to register event listeners and other resources that the plugin needs to run, however often not safe to interact 
with a lot of APIs.

This is when you can also open database connections, start threads, and other things that are not safe to do in the
`onLoad` method.

### Disabling

When a plugin is disabled, its `onDisable` method is called. This method is used to clean up any resources that the 
plugin has allocated. This method is called before all plugins are unloaded, and is meant for any cleanup that needs to
be done before the plugin is unloaded. This may include saving data to disk or closing connections to databases.

## Event Listeners

> Events are a way for plugins to listen to things that happen in the server and run code when they are fired. For 

Reviewer 2: this could be linked to the event api pages for how to register listeners

> Events are a way for plugins to listen to things that happen in the server. Events are fired when something happens,

Reviewer: `Events are a way for plugins to listen to things that happen in the server.`
`Events are fired when something happens, and plugins can listen to these events and run code when they are fired.`
`Plugins can listen to this event and run code when it is fired.`

the same thing (roughly) is repeated a few times in one paragraph

example, the `PlayerJoinEvent` is fired when a player joins the server. This is a more performant way to run code when 
something happens, as opposed to constantly checking.

Some events are cancellable. This means that when the event is fired, it can be cancelled which negates or stops the 
effect of the event. For example, the `PlayerMoveEvent` is cancellable. This means that when it is cancelled, the player 
will not move. This is useful for things like anti-cheat, where you want to cancel the event if the player is moving too fast.

It is important to think about how "hot" an event is when writing event listeners. A "hot" event is an event that is fired
very often. For example, the `PlayerMoveEvent` is fired every time a player moves. This means that if you have a lot of
expensive code in your event listener, it will be run every time a player moves. This can cause a lot of lag. It is

> important to keep event listeners as lightweight as possible.

Reviewer 2: I would add something about doing some checks first. i.e. in player move event, you often only care if they actually moved to a new block, so check that first and early return

## Commands

> Commands are a way for players to run code on the server. Commands are registered by plugins and can be run by players.

Reviewer 2: players, the console, rcon, command blocks etc

Commands are a way for players to run code on the server. Commands are registered by plugins and can be run by players.
For example, the `/help` command is registered by the server and can be run by players. Commands can be run by players
by typing them in the chat or by running them from a command block. Commands can also be run by other plugins.

Commands can have arguments. For example, the `/give` command takes an argument for the player to give the item to and
an argument for the item to give. Arguments are separated by spaces. For example, the command `/give Notch diamond` will
give the player named Notch a diamond. Note here that the arguments are `["Notch", "diamond"]`.

### Permissions

> Permissions a powerful tool and can be used to control who can run commands and who can listen to events. Permissions 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Permissions are a way to control who can run commands and who can listen to events. Permissions 
```

are registered by plugins and can be checked by other plugins. Permissions can be granted to players and groups. 

> Permissions can also be granted to other permissions. For example, the `paper.command.help` permission is granted to the 

Reviewer: can probably be described as a hierarchical structure instead of "permissions being granted other permissions"

> `paper.command`permission. This means that if a player has the `paper.command` permission, they will also have the 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`paper.command` permission. This means that if a player has the `paper.command` permission, they will also have the 
```

> `paper.command.help`permission.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`paper.command.help` permission.
```

## Configuration

Plugins can have configuration files. These files are used to store data that the plugin needs to run. For example, a
plugin that adds a new block to the game might have a configuration file that stores the block's ID. Configuration files
are stored in the `plugins` folder in the server directory. Configuration files are written in YAML. See 
[here](/paper/dev/plugin-configurations) for more information.

## Scheduling Tasks

Plugins can schedule tasks to run at a later time. This is useful for things like running code after a certain amount
of time has passed. For example, a plugin might want to run code after 5 seconds. This can be done by scheduling a task
to run after 100 ticks - one second is 20 ticks during normal operation. It is important to note that tasks might be 
delayed if the server is lagging. For example, if the server is only running at 10 ticks per second, a task that is 

> scheduled to run after 100 ticks will take 10 seconds.

Reviewer 2: this note here is good and I believe it should be added to the scheduler page too

> to run after 100 ticks. It is important to note that tasks might be delayed if the server is lagging. For example, if 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to run after 100 ticks - one second is 20 ticks during normal operation. It is important to note that tasks might be delayed if the server is lagging. For example, if 
```

> In Java, typically you could use `Thread.sleep()` to delay the execution of code. However, if code is running on the main

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Java, typically you could use `Thread.sleep()` to delay the execution of code. However, if the code is running on the main
```
